Family peace is precious.
It's even as the Bible proverb says,
better is a piece of dry bread where there is peace
than a house full of feasting along with quarreling.
But what exactly is family peace?
Someone might say,
as long as we're not arguing, our family's at peace.
But is that real peace?
We might think of two countries that were fighting
but have now agreed to a ceasefire.
Does the ceasefire mean that they've become real friends
who love one another?
No.
We know that genuine peace takes more work.
That's true in the family as well.
Our Heavenly Father knows that the most satisfying
family peace involves more than an absence of arguing.
It involves a family's well-being and unity.
Is such peace in a family today really possible?
Although none of us have a perfect family,
the answer is yes.
While it requires work,
perhaps breaking bad habits that disrupt peace
and adopting new ones that promote it,
those efforts are worth it.
In this symposium,
we'll see how Bible principles can guide families to peace
just as a road map guides travelers
to a beautiful destination.
In each of the talks,
we invite you husbands,
fathers, wives, mothers, children, teenagers
to be the traveler who studies the map
and then goes in the right direction.
The focus of our first talk is showing love and respect.
Why would you say these two qualities
are so important to family peace?
Well, it's simple.
Because family members who love and respect one another
feel secure and appreciated.
As a result,
our relationships are warm, close, and peaceful.
Of course,
showing love and respect can be a challenge these days.
In the following dramatization, notice why.
Irene.
You look so handsome.
Oh, you look beautiful.
Those came out so nice.
Look at you.
You're so so nice.
Sorry, Olivia.
Are you okay?
Yeah, it's okay, Sue.
I'm so sorry, boys.
Um, I'm all I did.
That was the last box.
Dad, are there some wedding photos?
Let me see.
Look at this.
Oh, you're so beautiful.
Olivia?
I know this is all new, baby.
Be patient.
Can I cut in?
Yeah, sure.
Thanks.
What's wrong?
Where's the desk?
We have to get rid of it.
This one's better for everyone.
You mean it's better for him?
For Max?
What are you saying?
What do you care?
Don't talk to me like that.
Get back here.
Hey, Olivia.
What do you think about the desk?
Come here, sweetie.
Come here.
So you never forget that I love you.
I hope you like it.
Today, every family faces challenges of some sort.
So let's consult our roadmap together.
In the Bible at Romans 12 and verse 10.
Would you read it with me, please?
That's Romans 12 and verse 10.
In brotherly love, have tender affection for one another.
In showing honor to one another, take the lead.
Now, what's the point?
Regardless of the role we play in the family,
each of us needs to treat our family members
with love and respect.
We need to take the lead or initiative to do so.
To help us, let's consider four good habits
that all of us should work to develop more fully.
Habit number one.
Regularly express tender affection.
When conveyed with sincerity, expressions of affection
are like sunshine and water to plants.
They help everyone in the family grow and thrive.
In the video we just watched,
did you note how Olivia cherished her father's gift,
that green desk, and his tender words?
He told her, so you never forget that I love you.
We also saw warm affection as the newly blended family
of Max and Irene looked at wedding photos.
That was encouraging.
Well, here's a question.
How are we doing an expressing tender affection in our family?
If that's not one of our strengths,
we might relate to a husband who mustered up the courage
to say I love you to his wife.
It brought her to tears, tears of joy,
and she said this,
I love you too,
but this is the first time in 25 years you've said it like that.
Well, what's the point?
We don't want to wait that long, of course.
But even an awkward attempt at expressing affection
in our family is an act of love,
and it can do so much good.
That's a habit we all want to cultivate.
Let's consider a second habit.
Be kind in your actions, tone of voice, and choice of words.
In the video, we recall Irene's reassurance to her daughter, Olivia.
She said, I know this is all new, baby. Be patient.
Mom was kind in what she said and how she said it.
A little later though, Olivia was upset.
While we know she was hurt,
her speech and actions were not so kind, were they?
During the pandemic,
all of us have been under tremendous stress,
and likely we didn't always treat others
in our family as kindly as we would have liked.
Well, that's in the past.
What can we all do now?
We can pray to Jehovah to help us take the lead in showing kindness.
For example, every day greeting one another kindly.
Every day saying, please, and thank you,
sharing little gifts, making time to talk, really listening.
All of these are acts of kindness.
That's a good habit we all want to cultivate.
What's habit number three?
Be quick to apologize and forgive freely.
In the video, Olivia's new step-sister Sue apologized
after she bumped into Olivia with a box by mistake.
That apology promoted peace.
When you and I realize we've hurt someone,
even unintentionally, what should we do?
We should make amends quickly.
A mother named Marina said this.
We try to set a good example for our children
in forgiving others and not getting offended.
When I am wrong, I apologize to my children.
I want them to learn to do the same in their dealings with others.
That's a good habit, wouldn't you agree?
Well, let's consider one more, a fourth habit.
Help your family members feel respected.
An article in the Awake magazine once made this insightful comment.
Respect is in the eye of the beholder.
What does that mean?
Even if we think we're showing respect in the family,
a good question to ask ourselves is,
do my family members feel that I respect them?
Is there more I can do to help my mate, my children, or my parents?
Feel loved and respected.
Brothers and sisters, when we fulfill our God-given role in the family
by developing good habits such as these,
we show respect both for Jehovah and all of our family members.
Now, let's think about Olivia and her mom.
In the next video, note how peace can be restored
by showing love and respect.
It's okay, Mom.
You didn't know.
Dad did that for her just before he died.
Anything I can do to help.
Romans 1210.
And showing honor to one another.
Take the lead.
Olivia?
I made your favorite tonight.
Thank you.
I wanted to tell you I didn't handle that so well today.
You had good reason to be upset about the desk.
Mom, you didn't know.
It's just one of those things that Dad did just for me.
I know he's my sub-dad now, but I just wish he would have checked first.
It wasn't Max.
It was me.
I wanted to surprise Max with a place for him to do his work.
So he didn't make you get rid of the desk?
No.
I just thought you both didn't care.
I will never, ever stop caring about you.
What a beautiful outcome.
The well-being and unity of the family were restored.
The mom Irene applied the principal at Romans 1210.
She took the lead or the initiative to talk kindly with her daughter.
Though Olivia was upset, she too showed love and respect
by being willing to listen to her mom.
As a result, the misunderstanding was cleared up
and Irene used the opportunity to reassure her precious daughter of her love,
saying, I will never, ever stop caring about you.
And how our hearts were touched to see their warm embrace.
When we take the lead in applying Bible principles,
we promote genuine family peace.
So may all of us be determined to keep showing our family
that we truly love and respect them in word and action.
Now, please listen as Brother Robert Lucioni,
a helper to the publishing committee,
considers the next talk of this symposium with the theme,
follow the roadmap to family peace, improve communication.